Let's take a closer look at how we express risk,
not how we measure it,
but how we express it.
One of the concepts,
that new risk managers often have difficulty with is accurately describing risk.
We've shown a couple of examples already.
That description is referred to as a risk statement,
they should be a few things,
they should be concise,
they should be specific,
judgment free, and action focused.
The idea is that we describe a risk behavior or outcome without
prematurely assessing the risk or making judgments about the state of a control.
For instance, risk; there is no firewall.
Is that really a risk?
It sounds to me like a risk,
but it really isn't specific enough.
It's focused only on a control and it doesn't mention any potential outcome.
Let's look a little closer at this.
Granted, not having a firewall is going to present risk,
many risks in fact,
but the statement fails to meet the objective of a good risk statement.
Good risks statements help make sure that stakeholders share
a common understanding of a problem so that they can, actually, remediate it.
Let's think about that bad risk statement,
that there's not a firewall.
I just bought a firewall and then I installed it on my network.
Does that eliminate any risk?
It's certainly the opposite of not having a firewall,
but I haven't configured it to do anything,
I don't think that it really eliminates any risk at all to just buy one.
Now, to help us out,
the US Department of Defense released a risk issue and management guide in 2017,
and it lists the elements of a proper risk statement.
The DoD says, "The risk statement contains the potential event or condition,
the consequences, and if known,
the cause of the event."
I like this because it really serves as
a step-by-step process to building effective risk statements.
Let's look at three examples.
We've got the DoD definition for risk statement here at the bottom, just for reference.
What about this first risk statement?
Is it good? Bad actors may be able to exploit weak encryption versions
supported by web servers in order to read sensitive data in plain text.
It meets two of our criteria.
It has the potential event or condition and the consequences.
Now, let's look at our second example.
Because SSL version 3 is supported on all externally facing corporate web servers,
bad actors may be able to exploit
weak encryption versions that are supported
in order to read sensitive data in plain text.
Now, is that a proper risk statement? It is.
It actually, meets three out of the three criteria,
it contains the potential event or condition,
the consequences, and the cause of the event.
Let's finally look at the third example.
Web servers support SSL version 3,
this really only contains one piece of information,
so it's not a proper risk statement.
The goal of restatement is that they're
used to perform risk assessments throughout the organization.
What we haven't yet talked about how to determine what risks should be assessed?
We can start to think about sources for risk statements.
Before assessing a system,
you could sit down and try to think of
all the risks that might potentially affect the system.
But risk managers or assessors,
usually, rely on just a few sources for risks statements.
They can come from things like existing organizational risk registers,
from old external audits or assessments,
or from various risk frameworks.
Let's talk about some of those risk frameworks.
In general, these are
industry guidelines intended to standardize the practice of risk management.
I like to think of them as falling into one of two categories.
Category 1 is process focused.
Those are frameworks that mainly focus on
establishing a well-developed risk management process.
Then category 2 are more risk statement focused.
These are guidelines that create a process for risk management,
but they also establish clearest statements to accomplish their brand of assessment.
We're going take a look at two of these frameworks right now.